doc/devel: Some high-level cluster architecture notes (#5075)
zeek/zeek: doc/devel/cluster/architectures.rst

subscribe layer. Zeek processes can subscribe to topics and receive remote
events published by other Zeek processes. All Zeek processes have visibility
into remote events published by all other process. Subscriptions use
prefix matching on topic names.

.. note::

   The publish subscribe visibility aspect has changed in Zeek 8.1 with the
   ZeroMQ cluster backend.
   Using the Broker cluster backend this wasn't implemented, putting the
   burden of routing remote events through the cluster onto the user.
   You may stumble over scripts where a worker process publishes to the
   manager's individual topic just for the manager to re-publish the remote
   event to all workers. This is unnecessary with non-Broker backends. It
   still works, but is less efficient than sending remote events directly to
   the destination topic.

   References

   * https://github.com/zeek/zeek/issues/3917
   * https://github.com/zeek/zeek/discussions/3649

Single Node Examples
====================

A Zeek cluster can be deployed on a single hardware/virtual system.
This looks as follows when the system has a single monitoring NIC.

> .. figure:: /images/cluster/single-system-one-nic.svg

Reviewer: Helpful diagrams! I couldn't immediately make sense of the appliance image and suggest removing them. To indicate host boundary you could add a corresponding shaded backdrop, add "Host system" to the corresponding boxes that currently say "packet acquisition and flow balancing", use bold outline and explain in text, etc.

   cluster. Contributions in this area are certainly welcome.

   For the classic central file-based logging. a single Zeek logger is useful
   as the aggregation point.

Multi Node Examples
===================

Zeek was originally developed during a time in which multi-core CPUs weren't
widely available and scaling and flow-balancing was actually done on the level
of a full hardware system.
This can still be useful today for deploying multiple smaller worker systems
with 10G NICs compared to a single large system with hundreds of CPUs and a
powerful 100G NIC. Such an architecture requires an external packet broker
that ensures consistent flow-balancing across the individual Zeek systems,
essentially introducing a separate flow-balancing layer.

Shared Publish Subscribe Layer
------------------------------

The following diagram depicts a deployment with three individual hardware
systems with the system to the left running a single logger and manager process.
Each system runs a single proxy process (proxy-1, proxy-2 and proxy-3) and
four worker processes.
All Zeek processes can send remote events to each other through the shared
publish subscribe layer.

> .. figure:: /images/cluster/three-systems-one-nic.svg

Reviewer 2: these more zoomed out diagrams are impossible for me to read, but each separate host could probably just be a box rather than all of that detail?

If the individual systems depicted all monitor the same network segment, correlation
across different worker processes will be limited to an individual system, however.
Using the previous architecture where all systems operate using the same publish
subscribe layer will not have this limitation.

WebSocket API to the Publish Subscribe Layer
============================================

Interacting with Zeek's publish subscribe layer using external non-Zeek
applications is possible using :ref:`Zeek's WebSocket API <websocket-api>`.

Conventionally, the Zeek manager process listens for incoming WebSocket
connections from external applications. By default, Zeek 8.1, the manager
process in a ZeekControl managed cluster listens on::

        ws://127.0.0.1:27759

The sketch below shows the idea.

.. figure:: /images/cluster/single-system-websocket.svg

Essentially, the manager process provides a cluster backend agnostic entry
point to Zeek's publish subscribe layer. It is possible to start such
WebSocket entrypoints on other Zeek processes (even workers) using
:zeek:see:`Cluster::listen_websocket` within your own scripts.

> As WebSocket provides a bi-directional persistent connection, this allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As WebSocket provides a bi-directional persistent connection, which allows
```

in place to load and analyze the data.
Today, Zeek logs may only be accessible to certain users and analysts, while
metrics are more interesting to Zeek operators.
Additionally, `Prometheus <https://prometheus.io/>`_ has become a very popular
option in the operational metrics space. Starting with version 4.1, Zeek has
moved into a direction where Prometheus exposition for operational metrics
is preferred over exporting them as classic Zeek logs.

The model is that in a Zeek cluster, every Zeek process opens a HTTP Prometheus
listener. An external Prometheus server scrapes metrics from these endpoints
at regular intervals. ZeekControl currently allocates listener ports statically.

The manager process additionally provides a ``/services.json`` endpoint for
`HTTP-based service discovery <https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/http_sd/>`_
of all processes in a Zeek cluster.
This allows the Prometheus Server to discover all metrics endpoints via the
Zeek manager's ``/services.json`` endpoint.

Adding to the previous diagrams, this looks as follows:

.. figure:: /images/cluster/single-system-prometheus.svg

This should seamlessly work with multi-node clusters.

.. note::

>    As of Zeek 8.1, the Zeek manager builds the ``/services.json`` response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   As of Zeek 7, the Zeek manager builds the ``/services.json`` response
```
... since it otherwise reads like a change we made in 8.1.
